git.md - Leslie (#8)
cs3157-borowski/guides: git.md

# Git Tutorial

Git is a source code version control system. Such a system is most
useful when you work in a team, but even when you’re working alone,
it’s a very useful tool to keep track of the changes you have made to
your code.

In this class, you are required to use Git for doing your homework
assignments. You will use Git not only for coding
your homeworks, but also for cloning the assignment repos and
submitting your code

This tutorial covers not only the basic git operations that you need,
but also the workflow between you and the TAs -- from our
preparation of an assignment all the way to the grading of your
submissions by the TAs. Even if you are already familiar with git,

> you may find the description of the workflow interesting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you may find the description of the workflow helpful.
```

## Set `EDITOR` environment variable

Type `echo $EDITOR`. If the shell does not respond with the name of
your editor -- vim, emacs, or nano -- add the following line at the end of
the `.bashrc` file in your home directory:

```bash
export EDITOR=your_choice_of_editor
source ~/.bashrc
```

Run source ~/.bashrc to make sure that your
modification to `.bashrc` has taken effect.

## Configure your git environment

Tell git your name and email:

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Full Name"
git config --global user.email your_uni@columbia/barnard.edu
```

git stores this information in `~/.gitconfig`

## Creating a project

Let’s create a new directory, `~/tmp/test1`, for our first git project.

```bash
cd
mkdir tmp
cd tmp
mkdir test1
cd test1
```

Put the directory under git revision control:

```bash
git init
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A git repository exists alongside the normal file system. It allows us to track the changes that we make to files, but only in the directory you've initialized it in and subdirectories. This means, for example, that you could create another git repository in `~/tmp/test2`, and the two repositories would have nothing to do with each other.```

If you type `ll` (I’ll assume that `ll` is an alias for `ls -alF`), you will
see that there is a `.git` directory. The git repository for the
current directory is stashed in the `.git` directory.

Let’s start our programming project. Write `hello.c` with your editor:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    printf("%s\n", "hello world");
    return 0;
}
```

Compile and run it:

```bash
gcc hello.c
./a.out
```

Let’s see what git thinks about what we’re doing:

```bash
git status
```

The `git status` command reports that `hello.c` and `a.out` are "Untracked".
We can have git track `hello.c` by adding it to the "staging" area (more
on this later):

```bash
git add hello.c
```

Run `git status` again. It now reports that `hello.c` is "a new file to
be committed." Let’s commit it:

```bash
git commit
```

Git opens up your editor for you to type a commit message. A commit
message should succinctly describe what you’re committing in the first
line. If you have more to say, follow the first line with a blank
line, and then with a more thorough multi-line description.

For now, type in the following one-line commit message, save, and exit
the editor: `Added hello-world program`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also do this in a one-line command with the `-m` flag. `-m`. specifies the commit message without opening a text editor:
```bash
git commit -m "Added hello-world program"
```

```

# Git Tutorial

Git is a source code version control system. Such a system is most
useful when you work in a team, but even when you’re working alone,
it’s a very useful tool to keep track of the changes you have made to
your code.

In this class, you are required to use Git for doing your homework
assignments. You will use Git not only for coding
your homeworks, but also for cloning the assignment repos and
submitting your code

This tutorial covers not only the basic git operations that you need,
but also the workflow between you and the TAs -- from our
preparation of an assignment all the way to the grading of your
submissions by the TAs. Even if you are already familiar with git,
you may find the description of the workflow interesting.

## Set `EDITOR` environment variable

Type `echo $EDITOR`. If the shell does not respond with the name of
your editor -- vim, emacs, or nano -- add the following line at the end of
the `.bashrc` file in your home directory:

```bash
export EDITOR=your_choice_of_editor
```

> Log out and log in again. Type `echo $EDITOR` to make sure that your

Reviewer 2: I think it's better habits to teach them to 'source' their .bashrc rather than log out and log in again.
$ source ~/.bashrc

```bash
git add hello.c
```

In git, "add" means this: move the change you made to the staging
area. The change could be a modification to a tracked file, or it
could be a creation of a brand new file. This is a point of confusion
for those of you who are familiar with other version control systems
such as Subversion.

At this point, `git diff` will report no change. Our change -- from
hello to bye -- has been moved into staging already. So this means that
`git diff` reports the difference between the staging area and the
working copy of the file.

To see the difference between the last commit and the staging area,
add `--cached` option:

```bash
git diff --cached
```

Let’s commit our change. If your commit message is a one-liner, you
can skip the editor by giving the message directly as part of the git
commit command:

```bash
git commit -m "changed hello to bye"
```

To see your commit history:

```bash
git log
```

You can add a brief summary of what was done at each commit:

```bash
git log --stat --summary
```

Or you can see the full diff at each commit:

```bash
git log -p
```

And in color:

```bash
git log -p --color
```

> ## The tracked, the modified, and the staged

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can call it git Files Status or git status?

Author: There were several questions in Jae's old exams to test the difference among us tracked, the modified, and the staged files within a repo, so I'd preserve this part. :)

## Pushing commits to a remote repository

Assuming you didn't delete the handin tag, you are ready to push
your "hw0 submission" to the remote server.
The `git push` command takes two arguments:
    A remote name, for example, origin
    A branch name, for example, main

```bash
git push origin main
```

will do the job, and now your submission is on the remote server.
If you want to re-submit after pushing, you have to delete the
old tag in the remote server first:

```bash
git push --delete origin handin
```

and then remove the local handin tag before tagging the new commit for another push.

## Pulling changes from a remote repository

Once you hear that the homework solution is available, you will want to
retrieve it and take a look. You do that by "pulling" the changes in
my repository into your repository. Let’s pull the changes we just
made in `test1` into `test2`:

```bash
cd ../test2/
git pull
```

The `git pull` command looks at the original repository that you
cloned from, fetches all the changes made since the cloning, and
merges the changes into the current repository. You now have the
solution right in your repository.

> ## Branches

Reviewer 2: For someone who is completely new to git I think this part about branches may be a bit vague. What do you think about adding a sentence explaining what a branch is?

Author: agree, but other explanations, i.e. from files perspective, seem even more complicated. I'd rather let them follow the instruction and make things work for now.

# Git Tutorial

Git is a source code version control system. Such a system is most
useful when you work in a team, but even when you’re working alone,
it’s a very useful tool to keep track of the changes you have made to
your code.

In this class, you are required to use Git for doing your homework
assignments. You will use Git not only for coding
your homeworks, but also for cloning the assignment repos and

> submitting your code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
submitting your code.
```

# Git Tutorial

Git is a source code version control system. Such a system is most
useful when you work in a team, but even when you’re working alone,
it’s a very useful tool to keep track of the changes you have made to
your code.

> In this class, you are required to use Git for doing your homework
> assignments (we call them labs). You will use Git not only for coding
> your labs, but also for retrieving the skeleton code I provide,
> submitting your code, and downloading solutions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this class, you are required to use Git for doing your homework
assignments. You will use Git not only for coding
your homeworks, but also for cloning the assignment repos and
submitting your code
```

> This tutorial covers not only the basic git operations that you need,
> but also the workflow between you, me, and the TAs -- from my
> preparation of an assignment all the way to the grading of your
> submissions by the TAs. Even if you are already familiar with git,
> you may find the description of the workflow interesting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers not only the basic git operations that you need,
but also the workflow between you and the TAs -- from our
preparation of an assignment all the way to the grading of your
submissions by the TAs. Even if you are already familiar with git,
you may find the description of the workflow interesting.
```

cd test2
```

Type `ll` to see that your `hello.c` file is cloned here. Moreover, if
you run `git log`, you will see that the whole commit history is
replicated here. `git clone` not only copies the latest version of
the files, but also copies the entire repository, including the entire
commit history. After cloning, the two repositories are
indistinguishable.

Let’s make some changes -- and let’s be bad. Edit `hello.c` to replace
`printf` with `printf%^&`, save and commit:

```bash
vim hello.c
git add hello.c
git commit -m "hello world modification - work in progress"
```

Now run `git log` to see your recent commit carrying on the commit
history that was cloned. If you want to see only the commits after
cloning:

```bash
git log origin..
```

Of course you can add `-p` and `--color` to see the full diff in color:

```bash
git log -p --color origin..
```

Let’s make one more modification. Fix the `printf`, and perhaps change
the "bye world" to "rock my world" while we’re there.

```bash
vim hello.c
git add hello.c
git commit -m "fixed typo & now prints rock my world"
```

Run `git log -p --color origin..` again to see the two commits you
have made after cloning.

> ## Generating a patch set

Reviewer 3: Can we get rid of this entire section? Not rly relevant for our class

commits you made after cloning. A diff is also called a "patch". The
mywork.mbox file, therefore, contains a set of patches, one for each
commit after cloning.

When you were looking at the mywork.mbox file in your editor, you
might have noticed that each patch kinda looks like an email message.
That’s because they are. In fact, the `mywork.mbox` file is in the UNIX
mailbox format (hence the extension `.mbox`), so you can view it using
an email application.

You can use `mutt`, a terminal-based email app, to open this file as if
it were your mailbox. Type `q` to exit out of mutt.

```bash
mutt -f mywork.mbox
```

If you want to read the file with the diffs in color, run the
following command. Use arrow keys to scroll and type `q` to exit.

```bash
cat mywork.mbox | colordiff | less -R
```

This patch file is in fact what you submit when you complete your lab
assignment. You will first clone my repository that contains some
skeleton code, add and modify files to complete the lab, and then
generate and submit a patch file that contains all your commits since
you cloned my repository. I will supply a script that automates the
patch generation and submission.

> ## Applying the patch set

Reviewer 3: Also this section

The TAs will apply your patch to my repository (the one you started
with by cloning it) to recreate your repository at the time of your
submission, and grade your work.

Let’s go through that process. Move up one directory and clone test1
into test3:

```bash
cd ..
git clone test1 test3
cd test3
```

Run `git log` to verify that you have the commits made in test1, but
not the ones made in test2.

Now let’s bring in the commits made in test2 by applying the patch
file that you generated in test2:

```bash
git am ../test2/mywork.mbox
```

You should see the following messages:

```
Applying: hello world modification - work in progress
Applying: fixed typo & now prints rock my world
```

Run `git log` to verify that now you have all the commits you made
both in test1 and test2.

## Adding a directory into your repository

> After the lab deadline, I will publish the solution by adding a
> "solution" subdirectory to my repository. Let’s simulate that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the homework deadline, we will publish the solution by adding a subdirectory to the solution repository. Let’s simulate that
```

When you use git tag -a -m <msg> <tagname>,
Git will tag the commit and annotate it with the provided message.
For example, I finish my hw0 and tend to submit

```bash
git tag -a -m "hw0 submission" handin
```

Git will tag the commit and annotate it with the provided message
with message "hw0 submission" and tag it as "handin".

To delete a tag on your local repository, you can use git tag -d <tagname>

```bash
git tag -d handin
```

It can remove the handin tag just made in your local machine.

## Pushing commits to a remote repository

Assuming you didn't delete the handin tag, you are ready to push
your "hw0 submission" to the remote server.
The `git push` command takes two arguments:
    A remote name, for example, origin
    A branch name, for example, main

```bash
git push origin main
```

will do the job, and now your submission is on the remote server.
If you want to re-submit after pushing, you have to delete the
old tag in the remote server first:

```bash
git push --delete origin handin
```

and then remove the local handin tag before tagging the new commit for another push.

## Pulling changes from a remote repository

> Once you hear that the lab solution is available, you will want to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you hear that the homework solution is available, you will want to
```

retrieve it and take a look. You do that by "pulling" the changes in
my repository into your repository. Let’s pull the changes we just
made in `test1` into `test2`:

```bash
cd ../test2/
git pull
```

The `git pull` command looks at the original repository that you
cloned from, fetches all the changes made since the cloning, and
merges the changes into the current repository. You now have the
solution right in your repository.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Branches
With group assignments, we recommend that you push work to branches first, and then merge back into main once your group members have reviewed the code. As an example, suppose that you are working on a part of the assignment, you can create a branch separate from main by doing the following:

`$ git checkout main`
`$ git checkout -b <branch-name>`

You can then commit your changes, and push to the branch by doing the following:

`$ git push origin <branch-name>`

This will allow multiple members of the team to work on separate features in parallel. When the feature you are working on is complete, you may then create a pull request to allow your team members to review the code, and finally merge the changes back into master. You can read more about using branches and pull requests from [GitHub’s own documentation](https://help.github.com/articles/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/).
```

Reviewer 3: this didn't format well....

## Learning more about git

> This tutorial covers everything you need to do your lab assignments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers everything you need to do your homework assignments.
```
